[Music]
this video is sponsored by dev Mountain
if you're interested in learning web
development iOS or UX design dev
Mountain is a 12-week design and
development boot camp intended to get
you a full-time position in the industry
to learn more visit dev mountain comm or
click the link in the description below
hey guys welcome to my no js' crash
course so in this video we're gonna be
talking about what note is and we'll
jump in and take a look at some of the
fundamental modules some of the
functionality that nodejs includes we're
gonna build a web server with just note
itself it's important to know that we're
not going to be using Express or any
other framework or anything like that
this course will be followed with an
express crash course but far too many
tutorials on node include Express and
it's important to know that they're
there they're different note is a
runtime expresses a framework that's
often used with node so I want to touch
on some of the core node modules at the
end I'll even show you how to deploy no
to Heroku which is an app hosting
platform so we'll look at some slides
and then we'll jump in and we'll start
exploring nodejs
alright so first off what is node it's a
JavaScript runtime as I mentioned it's
not a language it's not a framework or a
library or anything like that the
language is JavaScript
only instead of JavaScript running in a
browser environment as it has run
traditionally it's actually running on
your machine as a service or a runtime
it does this by using the v8 JavaScript
engine which is the same engine that the
Google Chrome browser uses it's very
powerful it's very fast node and v8 is
they're mostly written in C++ which is
an extremely powerful and fast low-level
language so essentially what all this
means is we can use JavaScript as a
server-side language just like we could
Python PHP C shop or any other
programming language so what should you
know before learning node I would
definitely recommend that you learn at
least the the basics of JavaScript
objects arrays conditionals all that
good stuff I would also suggest learning
some of the newer fee
teachers es6 plus like arrow functions
promises etc now since you're dealing
with server-side you're gonna be dealing
with HTTP quite a bit as you'll be
getting requests from the client to your
server and then sending back a response
and of course frameworks like Express
make this much easier but nevertheless
you should sue should still understand
for instance some of the important HTTP
codes like what is a status 200 a 404 or
500 etc maybe even learn about HTTP
headers things like that so note is also
used a lot for REST API in micro
services which 99% of the time they're
gonna be serving Jason as the content
type or the data type so I would suggest
learning Jason which is actually very
simple you could probably learn it in a
couple days if you don't already know it
and that's that's pretty much it maybe
the MVC pattern the Model View
controller pattern which is used pretty
commonly with node but again it's it's
just a plus you know it's not something
you have to know before you start
learning node alright so why use node
why is it a good choice for server-side
technology over let's say PHP or Python
so node is extremely fast efficient and
it's also highly scalable and one of the
reasons for that is it's event-driven
and it runs on a single loop and it's
non-blocking okay so it has a
non-blocking i/o model and if that
sounds like gibberish i'm gonna go over
the over what that means a little bit
more in the next couple slides so note
is also very popular in the industry
especially in startups there's a lot of
full stack jobs out there looking for
people that no node I'm sure many of you
have heard of the mean stack or the myrn
stack note is often used with front-end
frameworks like react view and angular
because it allows you to use the same
language on both sides so rather than
having a JavaScript front-end and then
like a c-sharp or Python back-end you
have the same language on both the front
end and back end which can be an
advantage all right so as I mentioned
nodejs is non-blocking and it's
asynchronous okay it works on a single
thread and it used
is non-blocking i/o or input-output
calls so something like PHP is usually
synchronous and it runs on multiple
threads so every time a request is made
it spawns a new thread and these threads
they take up system memory and can
eventually max out okay can max out
whatever the the memory load handles so
since these languages are synchronous
and asked to essentially sit and wait
for one process to complete before
starting the next now nodejs on the
other hand works in an asynchronous way
and it's non-blocking on a single thread
and this thick single thread can
literally support tens of thousands
connect of connections which are held in
what's called an event loop and this
optimizes throughput and scalability in
applications with many i/o operations
where you don't want to use node is with
CPU intensive apps so long running
calculations things like that all right
so here is a diagram of the event loop
and how it works so it runs on a single
thread and events are run asynchronously
basically when an event is triggered a
callback fires so this way the system
doesn't have to run a process sit and
wait for it to end and then run the next
like it does in many other synchronous
languages it simply fires an event or a
process and moves on
and once that event is fulfilled it runs
in the loop and you don't have to
understand this completely to be to be
able to start to work with node and
write node.js applications I just wanted
to kind of summarize a little bit how
this works in because it's the reason
that note is so fast and efficient all
right so let's talk a little bit about
what types of projects node is good for
so I mean the short answer is anything
that's not CPU intensive right so IO
operations are asynchronous and usually
that is for instance making a request to
a server sending data to a server
getting a response things like that
those are i/o operations however running
you know CPU calculations that that can
block the whole server and can make care
that application very slow so it's not
really good
for those types of things so like rest
AP is and micro-services note is great
for a lot of times you'll be building a
back-end API with node where you won't
even be serving for instance HTML pages
you'll be serving Jason you'll do all
your database interaction and stuff like
that within nodejs
and obviously it works with any database
you can use relational databases however
it's very popular MongoDB is very
popular to use with node because it's
very fast it's also very scalable so
node and actually make a really
good team real time services so things
like chat applications note is great for
crud apps so blogs shopping cards social
networks basically any application where
you're just fetching stuff from the
database displaying it you're updating
the database things like that note is
great for as well also tools and
utilities as long as they're not CPU
intensive so these are all things that
note is fantastic for all right so when
you download and install node JSU you
get something called NPM which is the
node package manager and it's used to
install third-party packages or modules
such as frameworks libraries and smaller
tools and when you install a package it
gets stored in a folder called node
underscore modules which will R will be
created automatically when you install
something and then any package or
dependency you install will get listed
in a file called package jason which
every node project should include it
holds info about your app like the name
the version and it also lists all the
dependencies which are packages that
your app needs to be able to run ok you
can also create NPM scripts to run
certain tasks such as web servers and
we're going to be looking into all of
this stuff a little later
I do have an entire crash course on NPM
where I go deep into all the commands
and stuff like that if you're interested
some common commands we have NPM init
which generates the package JSON file
and then if we want to install something
we simply do NPM install and then
whatever it is
we want to install in this case it's
Express which is a very popular web
framework now this will install it
locally in your application in your
application folder however you can also
install things globally on your system
by just adding the - G flag ok so
that'll put it on your system so that
you can run the commands or whatever it
includes you can run and run that
anywhere in your system alright so
modules are a huge part of node node has
a large set of core modules that it
comes with we're going to be looking at
a bunch of the common ones
you also have modules or packages that
you install with NPM and then you can
also create your own modules which are
simply files that have an export ok this
way you can include variables functions
classes or anything else from one file
you can include that in another and
we're gonna do this we're gonna look at
the syntax basically you create a
variable you set it to require whatever
module you want in this case it's the
path module which is a node core module
and then if you want to create your own
file and bring it in you can simply add
it to a create a variable require and
then set the path of the file so in this
case dot slash just means that this
there's a my file yes file in the same
folder ok so I think that's enough for
the talk and the slides let's go ahead
and jump in and let's start working with
node.js alright so the very first thing
that you need to do obviously is install
nodejs so you need to go to node.js org
and either download the long-term
support version or the current which is
the latest version with the latest
features i usually download the current
but it doesn't matter whichever one you
want to use should be fine so i'm just
going to open up a terminal real quick
or if you're on Windows you can open up
your command line your command prompt
and I just want to show you before we
jump into a text editor when you start
creating files I want to show you that
node comes with something called a
repple which is a read eval print loop
and it basically allows us to run
JavaScript directly in the console so if
we just type in first of all just make
sure you have installed with no - -
version and you can see you'll also have
NPM as well all right but if we go ahead
and we just say node and that's it we
hit enter
it'll bring us into the rebel and from
here we can actually type in JavaScript
so for instance we can say 1 plus 1 and
it'll give us 2 we can create variables
so I'll say Kant's name equals a string
of Brad and it'll give me back undefined
just because that that statement doesn't
return anything but if I go ahead and
type in name you'll see it gives me Brad
I can also do a console dot log name and
you'll see it will just log Brad all
right we can also create functions so if
I say like function hello and let's just
have it actually we'll just say return
[Music]
hello and then we'll just concatenate on
name so we'll create that function and
now if I say hello I can run that
function alright so I just wanted to
show you that we can in fact run
JavaScript from the console if we have
no installed however this is not this
isn't something that at least I use
pretty much ever but it is possible so
let's just control C or command C just
to get out of that alright so I'm going
to close up the terminal and head into
vs code and for now on I'm going to be
using my integrated terminal down here
and I have a folder open which is empty
it's called node crash course and this
is where I'll be creating all my files
so the first thing that you're going to
want to do usually when you're creating
anything with node is create a
package.json file and you don't have to
create it manually you can simply run
npm in it and it's gonna by default just
ask us some questions like the package
name so I'll keep the folder name as the
default the version hit enter that's
good description let's say ode crash
course entry point is basically your
main file by default it's index J s but
I've also seen app J s server J s those
are some other common file names test
command we don't need that git
repository author you put your name and
then license default is ISC that's fine
and then we'll hit enter
and it will create a package.json with
all that stuff in it all right now the
the the biggest purpose of package J
well I shouldn't say the biggest purpose
but one of the main purposes is to store
all your dependencies if your
application uses something you install
from NPM then it needs to be listed here
because if you move to another computer
another server whatever it may be where
you want to run your app you're gonna
run npm install and that's gonna install
all the packages that are listed
all right so later on i'm gonna be using
a very small module called UUID
just to generate random IDs so i'll
install that now just to show you if i
do npm install UUID so as you can see
over here it created a node modules
folder and it was put inside of there
and if I reload my package Jason you can
see it gets added as a dependency okay
now you can also have dev dependencies
which are dependencies that you just
need for development so we're gonna be
using something called node Mon which
will make it so that we don't have to
keep restarting our server and I want to
install that as a dev dependency so I
could say npm install and i could either
do - - save - dev and then the name of
the module which is node 1 but what i
like to do is just - upper case D which
is a shorter way of doing it so if we go
ahead and run that it should get added
as a dev dependency all right so now
right here you can see dev dependencies
and we have node Mon so when you're
ready to deploy or move this app
somewhere else you don't include them
node modules you can delete that and
then just run npm install actually i'll
show you that real quick if I were to
delete this whole and this has a lot of
stuff in it now because it has all the
dependencies of these modules and then
any dependencies that those have so this
this folder gets huge so you never want
to deploy this to a host if I delete
this and I have these listed in my
package Jason I can simply
npm install and it's going to then
recreate the node modules folder with
all that stuff in it okay so hopefully
that makes sense and we'll use those
modules later I just wanted to show you
that so let's create our main file which
is index dot JSP a Jason this just
tracks all of our dependencies with the
versions and by the way everything that
we install comes from the NPM j/s org
repository or website that's where
everything is stored there in that
registry
all right so in index J s I'm just gonna
simply do a console dot log and let's
just say hello from nodejs and save now
I can run this file by simply saying
node index dot j s and it prints it out
in the terminal in the console and when
we run a file we don't actually have to
put dot J s so just node index that'll
do the same thing all right so we can
run any JavaScript we want from the
terminal or any JavaScript file now most
of the time you're going to have
multiple files and these these other
files are basically modules you're gonna
create whether it's a class or a
function or an object or something that
you're going to export to bring in to
another file so I want to touch on that
so let's create a new file we'll just
call this person dot J s and inside here
let's go ahead and create create an
object called person and we'll set this
object to have a name of John Doe and
let's say age 30 now if I want to use
this this person object somewhere else I
can simply say module dot exports equals
person ok and if I save that and I go
back to index j s and I want to bring
that in I can simply create a variable
call it person and set it to
wire and then since it's a file and not
an actual module that we installed or a
core node module we want to put the path
which is dot slash meaning the current
folder and then person and then I'll go
ahead and console dot log person all
right and then we're gonna run node
index and you'll see that it'll give us
that object obviously if I wanted just
the name I could do person dot name and
we get John Doe okay now a lot of times
you'll have a class you could even you
could have a function that you could
explore it but let's say we wanted a
class in this file called person and
we'll create a constructor and this is
just a JavaScript class and he has six
class I'm not gonna go over JavaScript
syntax it's not what this video is about
it's about nodes specifically so I'm not
gonna explain every little bit of
JavaScript but let's say this takes in a
name and an age and we set this dot name
to name and this dot age to the age
that's passed in and we'll create a
method called greeting and let's go
ahead and just let's do a console log
we'll put some backticks in here and
we'll say my name is put our variable
syntax and we can save this dot name and
I am this start age okay and then we'll
go down here and let's make sure we
change this to an uppercase P we're
exporting the whole class and we'll save
that and let's bring in person uppercase
P and now we can instantiate a person
from it a person object so we'll say
person 1 equals new person pass in John
Doe and 30 and let's go ahead and run
person 1 dot greeting so now if I run
this node index file you'll see my name
is John Doe and I am 30 okay so we
exported the person class and we brought
it in and we call we instantiated a
person and then called the
reading method now it might seem like
this file here is just getting run
directly like this but actually when you
include a module like this it it's
wrapped in what's called a module
wrapper function and I'm just gonna
paste this in just to show you we don't
want to run this code this is actually
wrapped around all of this
so we have access to module require
exports also the file name and Dern aim
okay double underscore file name and
Dern aim we're using module dot exports
down here we can also use required to
bring things in and we also have access
to these two and just to prove that to
you I'll go ahead and say console dot
log let's do well do dur name and file
name okay I'm just going to comment that
out cuz that'll give us an error and if
we run node index you'll see before we
get the output of the greeting we get
this which is the dur name okay it's
just the full directory of this file and
then the file name includes the full
directory as well as the name of the
file which is person G is okay not index
because we didn't run this in index we
ran it in person J s okay so just wanted
to show you that those are available
because we'll be using this dur name and
file name later on and that's where it
comes from alright so let's go ahead and
close that up I think that's that's
pretty much it as far as exporting and
in requiring now you might be wondering
why we're not doing like import person
from person like we would in like let's
say react or anything es6 and that's
because node hasn't implemented this yet
if you want to be able to use the syntax
for now you have to actually you have to
implement babel to to compile it to
compile to es6 this is the last feature
really of es6 that isn't perfected in
node yet and I'm hoping that that this
cut that this is available soon that we
can do this
but just to show you if we try this and
we run note index it's gonna give us an
error unexpected identifier okay so yeah
we can't do that just yet but hopefully
soon so and by the way this is called
common J s this this method of use this
method of module is common J s the other
way that I just showed you is es6 okay
so now let's take a look at some of
nodes core modules now if we go back to
the nodejs website we go to docs and
we're using version 11 this will give us
all the core modules as you can see on
the left here as well as documentation
on some other stuff but let's take a
look at the path module which is used
quite often it's basically used to work
with file directories files in directory
paths as you can see and the
documentation for these modules is
really good because it has all the
different methods that are available so
for instance basename shows you the
parameters that it takes shows you what
it returns it shows you an example so
this is very helpful and I'm just going
to go over some of these okay I'm not
going to go over every single method of
all of these these modules but just some
stuff that you might run into so let's
jump back into vs code and these are
basically gonna be for reference so I'm
gonna create a new folder called
reference because I want you guys to be
able to have this if you want to go back
and look at some of these methods so I'm
gonna create a file in here called path
underscore demo dot j/s and we're gonna
want to run this file so I'm gonna CD
into reference and then to run this we
can say node path demo which obviously
right now isn't going to do anything
because there's nothing in it
so let's bring in the path module so we
can say require path and it's it's a
core module so we don't have to include
like a file path or anything we don't
have to npm install path because it's
already included with node
so let's take a look at some of the
methods so first one is base name
actually I'll put what it does so it
gets the base file name and remember if
we do a console log of double underscore
file name what that gives us is the
entire path and the file name at the end
so what Basin what path dot base name
does is it'll just give us the file name
so if we wrap this in path dot base name
and we go ahead and run this you'll see
we just get path demo Jas so they'll be
you know if you're working with files
they'll you'll probably have cases where
you're gonna have to dissect parts of it
and this will get you the base name now
if you want just the the directory name
we can do that as well so we can say
console.log path dot dur name and then
let's pass in the file name which
includes the the path and the filename
and that will give us just the directory
which in this case dur name double
underscore dur name will give us the
same thing but this way we're using the
path module to get this okay so we can
also get the extension and we'll
actually be using will actually be using
quite a bit of this stuff later when we
create our HTTP server but let's say
file extension so if we do path dot txt
and you'll see with envious code as soon
as I put a dot it shows us all the
available methods so we'll do X name and
let's pass in our file name and now if
we run this you can see that it gives us
a dot J s okay so it's just going to
give you whatever the extension is you
can also create an object with different
parts of the path so let's say create
path object and we do this with the
parse method so let's do console.log
path dot parse and pass in our filename
and see what that gives us and it gives
us this object with the root directory
base extension and name which is the
file name without the extension and we
can access any part since this is an
object we can access any property like
let's say we want the base we could say
dot vase and it just gives us just that
base right here just that value alright
and then the last thing I want to show
you is join so this will can't talk
while I spell concatenate so concatenate
paths and we use join for this so let's
say we want to create like the current
directory slash test slash hello dot
HTML let's say we wanted that so we
could say path dot join and it's just
going to put together each parameter we
pass in so we'll take the the der name
which gives us the current directory and
let's say we want to then do test ok so
a folder called test and then a file
called hello dot HTML ok so let's get
rid of this and let's see what this does
what this gives us
so we'll clear this up and run the file
and you'll see we get the directory name
so that's the first part and then slash
test which is this part and then hello
HTML now this works really well when you
have issues with with delimiter x'
basically with windows you have you have
different delimiters sometimes you'll
have this for the back slash and then on
Mac and Linux you'll have the forward
slash and this will put the correct
delimiter in which usually resolves
itself book itself but I have written
some system cases where it doesn't so
it's good to use this path join and
we'll be using this later on now there
are a lot of other methods that you can
use with the path module here but I'm
not going to go over all of them I don't
want to waste too much time here so the
next thing I want to look at is the file
system module or the fs module so in
reference I'm going to create a full
file called FS underscore demo dot J S
and we're gonna bring in here FS so
require FS and we're also going to bring
in path again because we're going to be
using that as well alright and first
thing I'm going to show you is how to
create a folder okay so this will create
a folder on our system and we're gonna
say FS dot make dur now by default these
are asynchronous and let me just show
you what I mean so if we go to C file
system and this shows us all the
different methods and if we go to make
dur you'll see that there is make dur
which is the one we're using which is
asynchronous which means that it takes
in a callback okay so anything you want
to do after you put in your callback
however there is a synchronous version
of most of these methods so as you can
see there's make tear sync which does
not take in a callback so basically if
you use a synchronous version you'll
wait until the process is complete until
it moves on with the asynchronous you
can call it and then and then just you
know keep going and it'll finish in the
callback so it's asynchronous so in most
cases you're going to want to use the
asynchronous version however I wanted to
show you there is a synchronous version
so like I said this takes in the folder
you want to create so I'm actually gonna
create a folder called test inside our
current directory so I'm gonna take the
path module and use join and let's join
the current directory name and then
let's
add a folder called test ok so that's
what we want to create the second
parameter of make dar is options and we
don't have any so I'm just going to put
an empty object and then a callback so
we can say like function and this will
take in a possible error and we can
check for that error and if there is one
then we can throw that error in the
console and then we'll just do a console
dot log and we'll say folder created all
right now you can do it this way with
function but I like to use arrow
functions so I'm going to get rid of
that the function text and then just put
an arrow and since I only have one
parameter of error I don't actually need
to use parentheses here so I'm gonna
save this and let's go ahead and run
node FS underscore demo so we get folder
created and if we look in our reference
folder we now have a folder called test
ok so that will create a folder now we
can also create files and there's
there's a method called open that you
can use to create a file however if you
want to write to it right away you can
use write file and that will create it
and write to it so let's go ahead and
say create and write to file so let's
actually copy this because all of these
are pretty similar they're all
asynchronous so instead of make
directory or make derp we're gonna use
write file and for the path let's do
same thing current directory test and
let's do we'll create a file called
hello dot txt ok so it just takes in a
path to a file that you want to create
not txt txt and then the second
parameter is gonna be the content that
you want to write so let's just say
hello world
and then this will give us back and
possible error we'll check for it if
nothing goes wrong then we'll just say
file written - all right so save that I
do have the prettier extension in vs
code so it just formatted it a little
bit so let's go ahead and run this
whoops
do hear file already exists oh because I
we're trying to create a folder here
that already exists so I'm gonna comment
that out however it did run this and it
did create the hello dot txt and if we
look inside actually I guess you know
let's try to run that again
all right so let's look in hello text
and now we get hello world all right now
let's say we wanted to add to it like
hello world and then we'll say I love
nodejs now if I were to copy this and
put this down here and change this to
space I love nodejs
let's see what happens so we're gonna
run both of these right files okay you
can see it was file written 2 is here
twice but if we look inside it just says
I love nodejs because what right file
does is it over writes whatever is
already in there if you want to append
to it then you want to use a pend file
so let's change this to a pend file and
then since I want to run both of these
together and this is asynchronous we're
gonna take this whole thing and put this
inside the callback
ok so we'll put that right here and
let's say file pend and save and now
what I'll do is just delete the hello
text all together so it recreates it
okay so right file should recreate it it
should add hello world and then in the
callback we're running a pend file which
should add I love nodejs so let's try it
let's make sure that's saved we'll run
it creates the file and if we take a
look it says hello world space I love
nodejs alright so that's right file on a
pen file now if we want to read file we
can do that as well let's just comment
this stuff oh and let's say read file
and I'm just gonna copy just copy this
okay so read file and the file we want
to read is gonna be the hello text so
I'm just gonna add in here hello dot txt
and let's see for the sec second
parameter of read file you're going to
want to put the character encoding which
is going to be utf-8 if you don't put
this and you want to get the data that's
in the file it's just going to give you
a raw buffer it's not going to give you
the actual data since we put the
encoding we can actually put after the
possible error the data that's in the
file and let's go ahead and console.log
that data and of course you could do
whatever you want with the data so let's
see that should work let's save this and
run the file and we get hello world i
love nodejs so it's reading what it what
is in this text file okay and then if we
want to rename a file we can do that as
well so let's change this to rename
comment that out so rename the second
parameter is gonna be the fot the path
and the new file name so I'm gonna copy
this whole path dot join and put that as
a second parameter and let's change the
name of the file to it'll just say hello
world I guess okay and it'll give us a
possible error and then it's just
console log file renamed up Sweeney
quotes
all right so let's save that run it file
renamed and now you'll see we have hello
world dot txt all right so those are
just some of the things you can do with
files with the FS module again there's
there's many more methods if you want to
look at the documentation and feel free
to have the repository in the
description if you want to add more
examples and then make a pull request
feel free to do that just for it to help
other people so let's see in reference
let's now look at let's look at the OS
module which is pretty simple so it's a
new file OS underscore demo dot j/s and
what this does is it gives us
information about our environment about
our operating system so let's do const
OS equals require OS so let's say we
want to get the platform meaning Windows
Mac whatever so let's do console.log OS
dot and it has a method called platform
so it's save this and let's run node oh
s demo and you can see Darwin so Darwin
is the the platform for Mac ok meaning
I'm on a Mac if you're on Windows you
get win32 on Linux you get what do you
get on Linux I forget I forget but it's
it's something different
so that will get us the platform we can
also get the CPU architecture so if we
do a console log OS dot Arc actually
it's a method so we need parentheses
we'll run that x64 the chances are
you'll get the same thing next we can
get CPU core info so we can get that
with OS dot CPUs
if I run that it'll actually give us an
object with information for every core
of the CPU and you can see I have quite
a few here this is an iMac Pro which has
a bunch of cores I forget it was like 12
cores or something like that
it's an Intel Xeon and it just shows you
all the different analytics all right so
that's CPU core info we can also get
stuff with them information about the
memory so like the free memory so
console and this is really cool because
you can you can build apps that that
have to do with with your system you
know so let's do free mem oops I'm sorry
Oh s dot free mem and if we run that
you'll see right here it gives us the
amount of free memory and we can also
get the total memory with total mem run
that so is the free memory is the total
memory of my system yours will be
different we can also get for instance
the home directory so we can say OS
starts home
and run that you'll see that my home
directory is user slash Brad Travis II
and then last thing I'm going to show
you is the uptime which is the amount of
time your system has been up so it's two
OS start up time and it gives you the
number of seconds that your system has
been up so I mean you can be creative
and create some cool applications with
this stuff so I'm going to close that up
and the next thing I want to look at is
the URL module so in reference I'm going
to create a file called URL underscore
demo dot Jas so obviously this this
works with URLs so let's do const URL
equals require URL now used to use URL
dot parse which is now deprecated i
believe now you want to just instantiate
a new URL object so I'm going to say
constant my URL equals new URL and then
let's pass in here it's a HTTP my
website.com
let's do slash hello dot HTML let's put
some parameters in here whoops spelt a
little wrong so let's put some
parameters in here like ID equals 100
and status equals active because a lot
of times you're going to work with URLs
that have parameters like this so first
thing I want to show you how to do is
get the serialized URL so basically get
the straight-up URL and we can use the
object we created dot href ok so we can
use the a that property so we'll run
node URL underscore demo we're running
the file and it just gives us the entire
thing you can also use the two string
method which will give you the same
thing
so if we do to string like that you'll
see we get the same thing all right now
let's say you want to just get the host
or the root domain which in our case
would be my website comm so we could do
my URL dots host run that and you'll see
we get my website comm now you can also
get the host name by doing my URL dot
host name and if I run that notice of
the same thing the difference between
this is that host name doesn't include
the port so if we have like port 8000
like that and we run it notice that host
name doesn't get the port host does okay
so that's the difference there in fact
we'll just say does not get poor all
right so next let's look at the path
name so it's console.log my URL dot path
name take a look at that it shows slash
hello dot HTML so it just gives us the
actual path the actual file let's see
next we're going to look at the
serialized query so basically the
straight-up query parameters so we'll do
console log search if we take a look at
that search whoops my URL dot search and
it gives us this
so basically everything after the
question mark okay now if we want to
actually create an object from this we
can use search params so let's say
params
objects
for that we just do my URL dot search
params okay so if you run that now you
can see we get an actual object with the
ID value and the status and the value
now we can actually add parameters
dynamically as well so if we want to add
per am we could say my URL dot search
params
append and let's append let's say ABC
and then the value one two three okay so
if we do that and then again we log the
search params let's see what that gives
us okay so you can see that now we've
added on an extra set of parameters so
ABC and one two three we can also loop
through these if we wanted to so this is
the last thing I'll show you guys so to
loop through the params we could take my
URL dot search params we could do a for
each and whoops alright so this takes in
a function I'll use an arrow I'll say
value and name and let's just do a
console.log and let's put in some back
ticks and we'll put the name colon and
then the value all right so let's run
that and you can see it's gonna loop
through and it's gonna give us each
parameter each key value pair
all right so that's the the URL
parameter I'm sorry the URL module so
next thing I want to look at is events
okay so using the event emitter so if we
go to the documentation and we go to
events let's see so much of the node
core API is built around idiomatic
asynchronous event-driven architecture
in which certain kinds of objects called
emitters
named events that cause function objects
or listeners to be called so essentially
we can create an event emitter okay an
event emitter class and then we can emit
events and have listeners that listen
for those events and then do something
when they're fired off so it's it's kind
of hard to explain so let me give you
some examples I'm gonna go ahead and
create in reference a new file called
event underscore demo dot Jas alright so
first thing we're gonna do is bring in
the event emitter and we're gonna set
that to require events alright and then
we want to create any middle class so
let's say class my emitter extends event
emitter which we just brought in all
right I'm not gonna put anything in here
but I'm gonna go ahead and init class or
in it I should say an it object so I can
say consulates call this my he met her
actually want to do yeah lower case not
the same as the class lower case so my
emitter and we'll set that to a new my
emitter object alright and then what we
can do is create an event listener
so we'll say my he MIT our dot on so we
want to say on event then let's put a
callback
he's an arrow function and we'll just
console.log event fired all right now
any time ie MIT this whatever I put in
here event this is gonna run so if I go
down here let's say an it event and I
say my
he met our dot omit event and we run
node event demo we get event fired and
if I can just run this a bunch of times
and every time I run it it's gonna run
whatever is right here alright so what I
want to do is is give you a bit of a
more practical example using event
emitter by creating a logger alright so
let's go ahead and close this up and
then in the root not in the reference
but in the root I'm gonna create logger
dot J s and let's let's do the same
thing by bringing in event emitter set
that to require events and I'm also
gonna bring in that UUID module remember
I installed that back in the beginning
I'm gonna say require UUID and all UUID
does is create some random Univ was it
Universal I forget what it's called it
stands for it's a certain format of of
an ID and just to show you what it gives
us let's do console.log UUID
and there's different versions so what
we want to do is dot version four and
that will generate just a random ID and
i can show that to you if we CD dot dot
back into the root and I run node logger
you'll see that this is what that
generated for us and we can generate as
many as we want so if I run that you can
see it just generates different ones now
I want to create a class here called
logger and I want to extend
event emitter okay and then we'll have a
method in here called log that takes in
a message okay and then when this is
called we want to call a vent a raise an
event so we're gonna take I'm gonna say
this this pertains to the class right
and we're extending event emitter which
includes the omit okay and our reference
file here we called my emitter I'm sorry
we called yeah my emitter dot emit
however this method is gonna call this
dot he meant since we're extending event
emitter and let's emits an event called
message and let's add in here an ID
which will set to UUID
dot version four and then let's also add
the MSG that we pass in okay and this is
the same as doing this like that so
every time we call log it should show a
new ID with the message that sent now
I'm gonna export this module dot exports
logger and then in the index J ass let's
clear all this out and let's bring in
logger from require whoops am i doing
I'm mixing es6 in common j s so Consta
equals require dot slash logger cuz
remember it's a file and then let's go
ahead and create or instantiate a logger
because remember logger is a class so we
need to instantiate it and then let's
call log r dot on
message okay
now this is gonna give us a call back
with some data so for this data let's
just console.log and let's let's say
we'll say called
listener and let's put in the dater as
well I shall change this to back ticks
and then we'll put data okay and then we
actually have to call the log method so
under here let's just say log r dot log
and let's send a message we'll just say
hello world
so now let's call the index file alright
so this is wrong I don't know why I did
this because this is an object this data
object should be the ID in the message
so let's actually let's put quotes
around call listener and then just put a
comma here and then we'll show the data
like that okay so now let's run this
again and we get called listener and it
shows ID which is a generated ID from
from the UUID module and then the
message that we passed in and we can
call this as many times as we want with
different messages hi hello and we'll go
ahead and run that and you'll see that
each time it's the listener is gonna get
called and it's gonna show a new ID with
a new message and this may not be the
most practical example but you can just
see how this works you can even omit an
event it's gonna call whatever whatever
we put in here and you could use your
imagination and maybe even bring in the
FS module the file system module and log
the ID and the message to a file okay so
that you can just use a pen file and you
could have a file that has all your logs
alright and maybe you can use that have
that use that as your homework
assignment for this course alright so I
want to move on because we're really
running out of time here and I want to
get to the HTTP module so we're gonna
create a whole server here a very basic
server but nevertheless it is still
gonna be a web server but before we do
that I just want to end the reference
folder create a file called HTTP
underscore demo dot jsut can see that
the bear of the bare minimum just to get
a server running and then we'll create
the the main server in our index file so
let's clear this up and let's CD back
into reference and let's go ahead and
bring in HTTP so we want to require HTTP
all right now we want to create a server
object and we do that by taking HTTP and
calling create server ok now this takes
in a function however I'm going to use
an arrow function so I'm gonna put our
parameters that we need which is request
and response put an arrow function and
when we get a request we want to then
write a response
so we'll do res dot write okay as a
method call right which basically just
outputs to the browser and let's say
hello world and then we want to end so
res dot end all right now in order for
this to run it needs to take in it needs
to listen on a port so we're going to
tack on to this dot listen and then this
takes in a port number I'm gonna put in
5,000 and then I'm just gonna put a call
back here to console log and we'll just
say server running just so just so it
shows something in the console so server
running alright so we'll save that and
then let's run node HTTP underscore demo
and you can see server running and it's
in we can't type anymore so now let's go
to our
browser and let's go to localhost port
so colon 5,000 and we get hello world
okay so that's that's the the the most
simple web server you're ever going to
see in your life
now I want to create something useful
where we can actually load HTML pages we
can load you know CSS files things like
that
so we're gonna create an actual web
server and we're gonna just close this
file and to stop the server from running
you just want to do a ctrl C okay and
let's CD dot dot to get back into the
root alright so we're done with the
reference folder so let's open up index
J s now it's important to know that
actually you know what let me just take
this and put this in the log or J s so
you guys have this as a reference so
instead of exporting it I'm just running
it in here ok so it's important to know
that if you use a framework like Express
it makes this stuff a lot easier with
Express you can specifically you can say
like you know I want my app to receive a
get request to the page slash abouts and
then you can have a callback function
you can do what you want so it makes it
much easier however I think it's it's a
good thing to understand how to do this
without express at least just load basic
web pages of different content types and
so on so we're gonna be using all all
core node modules so let's bring in HTTP
and let's also bring in path and let's
bring in FS okay so now we're kind of
putting everything together that we've
learned so we want to create a new
server object however I'm gonna put it
in a variable called server so HTTP dot
create server and then this is going to
take in a function with request response
now remember we have to listen on the
ports
however instead of tacking it on we can
now take that server object or variable
and we can say dot listen all right now
we want to put a port in here however
I'm gonna put the port inside of a
variable alright now I could just set
this to like five thousand however when
we deploy this it's not always gonna run
on five thousand it's gonna run on
whatever you know whatever our our host
is going to decide which is going to be
in what's called an environment variable
so it's going to be in process dot e NV
dot port okay but we want to do or five
thousand so basically it's gonna first
look for this it's gonna look for the
environment variable and then if that's
not found then it's gonna run it on five
thousand okay now in here we just want
to put port okay and then let's put a
call back with a console log and we'll
put in some back ticks and we'll say
server running on port and then we'll
just put in the port number okay
so inside here let's um I showed you how
we could just you know we can write
write something out to the browser but
that's not what we want to do we want to
load a file so I'm going to test
let's test to see what the URL is now
request object we have actually you know
what we'll do is let's just console.log
the request URL okay just so we can see
what that is now if I run my server if I
say node index you can see server
running on five thousand if I go to four
five thousand and reload it's gonna hang
because we didn't send any response
however if we look and look if we look
in the console you can see slash okay so
that's the request URL now if I were to
go to let's say slash about and go back
you'll see that we get slash about so we
can see what URL is getting is getting
called so let's do an if statement here
and we're gonna make this more efficient
after I'm just doing this for an example
so let's say if requests dot u RL is
equal to slash then we know that's
that's the index page and instead of
just writing out something like I could
do you know Raz dot and you don't even
have to do dot right and then end you
could simply do res dot and and put your
content in here and you can even put
HTML in here like let's say home alright
so if I save that and let's do control c
and restart the server and then go to
localhost 5,000 we get home alright I'm
actually going to make this smaller so
that we can see both at the same time
now if I were to change this to let's
say homepage and save and reload notice
it doesn't change because I have to go
down here and manually restart the
server now it says home page this is
where a node Mon comes in and very
useful and remember we installed that
back in the beginning as a dev
dependency so this node mon here we
could use let's go down here and we
could say no
maaan and then index so instead of node
node Mon I'm sorry we can't do that
because we didn't install it globally so
what we want to do is create an NPM
script okay if we did install node
montn globally we would we be able to
do that however that's not the best
practice it's not what what I would
suggest what we can do is go to scripts
okay and we don't need this test script
so we can replace this and I'm gonna
just do start all right now for start I
just wanted to run the standard node
index just like we were before however
that's not going to update unless we
keep restarting the server but the
reason I'm putting it here is because
once we deploy it's gonna call this
start and that's what we want we don't
want to use node Mon in deployment so
I'm going to add another script of dev
and I'm gonna set that to node Mon index
so instead of just running with with
node it's gonna use node Mon which
constantly watches it so we don't have
to update so let's save this clear this
up and let's say npm run dev okay so
we're using NPM to run this script right
here which will run node Mon okay and
now you can see that it's running on
five thousand now if I go back to index
and they change this back to home and
save node Mon is continuously watching
it so if I reload it changes I don't
have to manually control C and restart
it okay so node Mon is an excellent tool
so back to our code here instead of
doing this I mean this if I do a you
know control U or whatever what is it
control option you and look at our
source code we have no doctype we have
nothing we don't even have a content
type if I were to open my dev tools and
go to network and take a look at so
let's make this bigger for a second and
take a look at the
content-type which I don't even think it
will say yeah it doesn't even say but we
want this type to be HTML so we can add
a content type by saying R as dots right
head so basically right to the headers
and we want this to be a 200 response
which means everything is okay and then
pass along the content type and we want
to set the content type to text slash
HTML all right so let's save that and
now when we reload you can see that we
get status 200 and if we take a look
down here we have content type text HTML
okay so that you definitely want to have
that in there now I don't want to just
just output the HTML here I want to load
a file so I'm going to create a folder
called public and basically this is
where I want all of the public HTML
files CSS anything like that so I'm
going to create an index dot HTML and
let's also create in about dot HTML okay
so an index I'm just going to generate
some boilerplate and just put home page
put an h1 we'll say welcome to the home
page and then we'll copy this we'll go
to about change the title to about and
we'll just change this to about all
right so we have two HTML pages in the
public folder which right now that
they're not getting loaded in any way
they're just there so what I want to do
is if the request URL is slash I want to
load the home page so I could use the FS
module I'm just going to go right above
this for now so use the FS module dot
read file
and let's do let's look at actually
let's use path dot joined and will do
double underscored our name and then
public and then we want to load the
index.html okay and then second
parameter will be our callback and
inside here is where we want to put this
stuff however remember when we read a
file we get first possible error and
then we also get the data which I'm
actually going to call content okay and
then we'll paste that in okay now when
we end we don't want to oh we don't want
to output this this h1 we want to output
the content of the file okay and we also
want to make sure it's a status 200 and
its type HTML so I think I have
everything here we should probably check
for the error as well but let's save
that and reload and we get welcome to
the home page okay so to reiterate we're
checking the URL if it's slash which it
is we're gonna read the file index.html
that's in the public folder and we're
gonna then check for an error we're
gonna set the status and the content
type and then we're gonna simply serve
the the HTML page okay so hopefully that
makes sense and then of course we could
check for the request URL being slash
boats and we could load the about page
so if we reload we go slash about there
we go
actually I'd probably well that's good
now let's say we wanted to we wanted
this to be like like a REST API so we
wouldn't be serving HTML we'd be serving
Jason so let's actually add in let's
change this let's change this to if
slash API slash users let's let's get
rid of this stuff so normally what we
would do is fetch data from a database
and serve that however I'm gonna just
gonna hard code in it say users equals
an array so name I'll say Bob Smith age
40 and we'll do one more John Doe
alright so we have this users array and
then we would want this to be a 200
response however this is Jason content
so we wouldn't do text HTML we would do
applications slash Jason alright and
then we'd need to turn this object
JavaScript array of objects into Jason
so we'll do res dot end and we would do
jason dot stringify users okay so let's
save that and now if I were to go to
localhost 5,000 slash API slash
users there we go we get our jason okay
so if you were to build some kind of
Micra service some kind of rest api you
could do this but you probably use
Express or something like that I'm just
showing you how to do it with just node
okay so this really isn't very efficient
like we're gonna stick to we're gonna
stick to just serving HTML files and so
on however this isn't efficient because
every single page we want to add we
would have to do you know if this or
whatever and also we need to be able to
handle for instance CSS okay if we want
to include a CSS file or images or
anything like that so this isn't this
isn't gonna work
so let's comment this out because I
still want you guys
you have this but let's start over so
we're gonna go under all that stuff we
just did now I want to make the file
path dynamic so let me show you what I
mean I'm gonna say build file path and
we're going to create a variable here
called file path and set it to path dot
join the current directory name and then
public and then let's say basically I
will I want to set this to the request
URL so for instance if if we go to slash
about HTML then I wanted to load about
dot HTML if we go to slash contact HTML
I want it to look for contact HTML
however the route is a little different
because it's just slash so I'm going to
use a ternary operator here I'm going to
say for request dot URL if that is equal
to slash then I want to load index dot
HTML in the public folder else
okay colon is else that I want request
dot URL whatever that is all right so
let's actually do let's just do res dot
and just so we can see what this path is
gonna be so let's do a console log of
file path alright and we're gonna just
go to the root and you'll see the PI
it's going to show anything that sense
so even the favicon but you can see the
index.html because this is the root if I
go to slash about HTML it shows you
public slash about HTML so so this file
path is correct in terms of what we want
to load now we're also going to want to
set the content type
okay like HTML as a content type of text
slash HTML CSS is text slash CSS Jason
is application slash Jason and so on so
what I'm gonna do next just get rid of
that for now is I want to get the
extension of the file and you guys
remember how to do that right we do
let's create extension aim as a variable
and set it to our path module ext name
method and pass in our file path so
that'll give us the the extension of the
file that's that's being loaded okay are
being sent now we'll set a content type
let's set the initial content type
so let's content type is gonna be by
default text slash HTML because that's
what we mostly expect however we want to
check the extension and then set the
content type and we'll use a switch
statement for that okay so let's say
switch and we want to check the
extension name all right now I'm just
going to paste these in because it's
just going to take too long for me to
type out so we're basically gonna check
each case so if it's j/s we want text
javascript if it's CSS we want text CSS
jason if it's an image that should have
that content type or i'm sorry a PNG it
should have that if it's a jpg it should
have that okay so that's basically all
the file types that i want a handle for
this server alright so that takes care
of setting the file path and setting the
content type now we need to actually
load a file so let's go down here let's
say read file so we're gonna do FS dot
read file
and we want to pass in the file path
whatever that is and then it's going to
give us our possible error and then
let's say content alright now we didn't
really go over errors the error codes
however we want to check for a specific
type of error and this error will be
it'll be an object that'll have a
property called code so I want to say in
here if the error dot code is equal to e
and o ENT okay II know net and o net and
what this means is the page isn't found
okay and in most cases that's what it's
going to mean so let's say page not
found so the way that I want to handle
this you could handle it however you
want but I want to load an error page so
in my public folder I'm going to create
a file called 404 dot HTML and I'm just
going to copy one of these HTML pages
and simply say and the title not found
will say 404 not fun obviously you would
have this be much more stylish it would
be an actual website but I'm just trying
to show you how to create the server so
if the page isn't found let's do FS dot
read file again and you can see the
reason that I went over all those
modules there you guys wouldn't know
what this was if I didn't go over the
the boring stuff earlier so read file we
want to pass in path join so we want the
directory name public and then we want
to load that 404 page so 404 dot HTML
okay and then the second parameter will
be the callback with the error and the
content it's actually close this up so
we have the error and the content and
then here
we want to first of all send a 200
response so I'm gonna just copy that
line so right head 200 and it's gonna be
text slash HTML and then we want to send
the content so let's say res dot end and
let's say content and let's specify that
we want it to be utf-8 all right so if
it's not if it's not found it should
load that now let's go to the end of
this if right here and let's put in else
so basically if it's a different error
so still in within the error but if it's
not this code then it's gonna be some
server error so most likely a 500
alright so for that I'll just we'll do a
res dot right head and we'll send a
status of 500 and then let's just do a
res dot and and I'm just gonna put in
here server error and then the code so
error dot code not really an elegant way
to handle it but whatever it's fine so
now if there's no error so at the end of
this if right here let's say else if
there's no error then that's a success
successful response so again we'll write
a 200 response and it's going to be an
HTML file and then we just want to load
the content ok and the content is gonna
be this alright so hopefully that makes
sense I'll reiterate real quick so let's
start at the top which is straight you
know actually the top is up here who are
creating a server that gets a request in
response ok every time a file is sent
then we're gonna we're basically going
to look in the public folder and we're
going to value
whatever this is request dot URL if it's
slash we're gonna load the index if not
we're gonna load whatever that file is
called about HTML contact whatever okay
then we're gonna get the extension and
we're gonna evaluate the extension and
set the content type based on that okay
the initial being HTML and then we're
gonna read the file if there's an error
we're gonna check for this error code
which means that it's not found then
we'll load the 404 some other error then
we're just gonna send a 500 if it's
successful send a 200 response and we're
gonna send the HTML file and we're gonna
oh I'm sorry we did this wrong it should
not always be HTML it should be whatever
the content type is good thing I did
that okay I think that yeah that should
be right and then we're gonna finally
just send the content of the file okay
so let's go ahead and save this and I
think we should it should work hopefully
let's go back let's reload about okay
and let's go to the home page and that
was about dot HTML and then we get
welcome to the home page now we should
be able to also include CSS files so in
public if I say new folder CSS and new
files style dot CSS and let's just do
body will say background dark color
white and let's reload oh we get include
it so back in index.html let's say link
to dot slash CSS slash style dot CSS and
we want this on all pages so let's save
this go to about paste that in save it
go to 404 paste that and save it reload
and you can see the CSS is working so if
I go to about dot HTML that works now if
I go to something that does
and exist like whatever we get our 404
page okay so it's working nicely and if
we if I open up the network tab and
reload you'll see that the document is
we get a 200 response it's a text HTML
and if we want to look at the CSS it's a
2-under response and the content type is
text CSS so you want to make sure you're
giving the right status codes you're
giving the right content types because
now you're working server-side okay if
you've been working as a front-end
developer with you know react or view
and so on you probably have been just on
the side that is making the request but
now you're actually serving the response
ok so learning about HTTP is essential
all right so I think that's pretty much
it obviously this isn't really like a
project or anything like a website or
application but I wanted to just get
into the specifics of node and some of
the core modules and so on so the last
thing I'd like to do is just a simple
deployment to Heroku and the main thing
to remember as far as the code that
we've written is the port you want to
use this process in the port ok you also
want to make sure that you have your
start script as node and then index or
whatever your main file name is okay
because Heroku is going to look at those
things now in order to push to Heroku
you need to sign up for an account let's
go to Heroku comm and you just want to
sign up I already have an account so I'm
just going to log in and you know if you
just create an account you won't see
anything here but all your apps will
show up as these weird names here unless
you rename them but you're gonna need
the CLI tools so if you search for
Heroku CLI just Heroku CLI and click the
first link download and install and if
you're on Mac you can download the
Installer or use homebrew Windows use
the Installer
ubuntu and then other installation
methods as well but you want to get that
installed okay once you have it let's go
ahead and stop our server with ctrl C
okay once you have it you should be able
to say Heroku - - version I believe I
have it installed yep so if you haven't
installed it'll show and then you're
gonna want to log in through the
terminal so let's say Heroku login so
I'm gonna use my email and password
which I believe that's it okay so now
I'm logged in now the way that we the
way that we pushed Oroku is with git so
you need get installed if you don't have
git installed just go to get - SCM comm
go ahead and download and install it
make sure you have it okay and then we
want to initialize the git repository
now I don't want to push my node modules
folder in fact I don't want to push my
reference or anything like that either
so I'm gonna create a new file here
called dot git ignore and this is not a
hold on get ignore this is not a get
tutorial so I'm not going to you know go
over everything about git I do have a
crash course if you're interested
however we can put node modules in here
to prevent it from getting pushed also
reference I don't want that getting
pushed or log or J s or person dot JSP
don't need those we just want the the
main site the main server we created ok
so now let's do get an it to initialize
the repository let's do get add all
let's make a commit so get commit - M
and say initial commit ok so once we
have that done we can then say let's
clear this up we can say Heroku
create okay so with our account it's
going to create a new new app and it's
going to give us some weird domain name
and if I go back to my dashboard and
reload you'll see that limitless meadow
that's what it created so next thing we
want to do is click on that and go to
deploy and just grab the command to add
this as our remote repository so this
right here we want to copy that and then
paste that in our terminal okay so now
that's added as a repository we already
did the add and the commit now all we
have to do is push to Heroku master to
the master branch so let's say git push
Heroku master okay and this is going to
push our application to Heroku sets any
environment variables that it needs
okay so build succeeded all right so now
you can go to the URL or you can just do
Heroku open and that will open it in
your browser and there it is so as you
can see this is now deployed to the
Internet our nodejs app so if I go to
slash about HTML there's our boat page
if I go to something that doesn't exist
404 not found all right guys so I know
this was a long video if you stayed till
the end I I genuinely really appreciate
that I really do if you if you can spend
an hour and a half watching a video of
mine I really appreciate that
so thank you and hopefully you got
something from this even if you've used
note in the past hopefully picked up a
couple things at least but thanks for
watching again I appreciate it and I'll
see you next time